---
layout: post
title:  "Advent of Code 2020 - Autopsy"
date:   2020-12-26 
categories: advent-of-code
tags: advent-of-code advent-of-code-2020 python
---

For the first time my AoC ended on the 25th and whilst I wish this was because
of a year of improvements on my end I think it is more to do with the level
of difficulty sliding a long way down the North Pole this year.

With individual posts for each day already up on the site, this isn't going to
be a long post but there are a few overall things worth mentioning.

## Requiem for the Themes

There was a lot of Conway puzzles and initially I thought that regex might have
been front-and-centre but this year I failed to find a theme. The intcode,
while contentious, of last year was something I looked forward to. I understand
it meant that one failed day could compound into missing many a'star but it
allowed these daily challenges to delve deep into a particular facet of coding.
Another year, I remember being very pathfinding heavy and it cemented the
DFS/BFS/A\*/Dijkstra algorithms fairly well for me.

If there was a theme I missed it and the same applies to if there wasn't.

## Sod Christmas, Just Save Yourself

The narrative theme, however, was a nice change of pace. Similar puzzles were
given a fresh coat of paint and came out shinier than if Christmas was once
again on the line. The story isn't the focus of course but I enjoyed it overall
and the absurd situations left some fun images floating around in my head.

## Classes Coming in Clutch

Utilised infrequently but never without success, classes offered me a lot of
confidence in my code and its ability to contort to the demands of the second
star. Sure they were small with few methods and could have perhaps been
stripped back to smaller structures but they felt robust and satisfying.
Definitely something I need to make more use of in future Advent of Code's and
other projects.

## Highlight of the Holiday

Possibly the hardest challenge of the year and the one that I felt the best
about upon completion.
[Day 20 - Jurassic Jigsaw](https://findlayian.com/advent-of-code/2020/12/20/aoc-2020-day20.html)
was a multi-step affair requiring different transformations of a pattern,
stitching them together and then counting how many sea monsters there are...
what's not to enjoy about that.

Reassembling the image through a DFS was the most creativity I showed during
the festivities and it: worked wonderfully: quick, was comprehensible and
somewhat crafty (even if I do say so myself). It went from thought to working
code far faster than it should have and whilst overkill, but feeling correct,
for part one it was absolutely required for the second star.

Then, inspiration strikes once more for quickly identifying the pattern for the
monsters and I feel like I've truly conquered an absolute beast!

## This Year's Festive Log

There are some days in AoC's past that I've hated when I'm in the midst of them
and then there are those
[like day 19](https://findlayian.com/advent-of-code/2020/12/19/aoc-2020-day19.html)
whose code I still can't bear to look at. A strong initial idea
let down by unfamiliarity and a lack of skill led to a star that I don't feel
good about and arguably don't deserve. Sure it works and a lot of work and far
too much time went in to it, but it's undoubtedly the nadir of nativity.

## Difficulty Decrease

It became clear fairly early on that this year wouldn't be as challenging as
year's past; the first weekend didn't come with it's usual kick and at the time
I was rather disappointed. Advent of Code has represented a large part of my
festive schedule on other years. A humbling, frustrating experience that I've
scraped my way through. These 'quick' challenges sometimes represented my
entire day but in the end I always felt my time had been invested well as I
would emerge with new tricks, algorithms and mathematical understanding. This
year, the lack of challenge unfortunately came with a lack of growth.

I learnt a few things and, arguably as importantly, reinforced skills that had
lain dormant since last time but the post-battle euphoria happened only twice
and was nowhere near as powerful. That being said, I think this might have been
my favourite year in terms of difficulty. For the first time I was able to grab
two stars everyday. For the first time I didn't feel overwhelmed by a backlog
or tempted to look at someone else's answer for a clue. I felt like I was
coding with intention not just trying stuff hoping it I could wrangle the right
answer out of a mess of code.

I got less out of this year but put far less in terms of my time and energy
in to it - I think the trade was worthwhile.
